Styling and structure changes to syntax.md (#419)
unicode-org/message-format-wg: spec/syntax.md

## Overview & Examples

### Messages and Patterns

A **_message_** is the complete template for a specific message formatting request.

All _messages_ MUST contain a _body_.

> The _body_ of a _message_ consists of either a _pattern_ or of _selectors_. 

Author: Your comment is exactly my proposal to change the ABNF (see the discussion of the refactoring of this document in today's call)! The current syntax doesn't support talking about a selector cleanly.

> An empty string is not a valid _message_.

Author: That's correct.

> An empty string is not a valid _message_.

Author: DONE

A _message_ MAY also contain one or more _declarations_ before the _body_.

> A **_pattern_** is a combination of _text_ and _placeholders_ 

Author: In other specification regimes (think: W3C) we do auto linking of pluralized terms. While I can technically agree with excluding the "s", I think it's simpler not to.

"sequence" is a good change.

> A **_pattern_** is a combination of _text_ and _placeholders_ 

Author: Done 'sequence'

to be formatted as a unit.

> All _patterns_, including simple ones, begin with U+007B LEFT CURLY BRACKET `{` 

Author: This is the original text, modified slightly. Basically a "simple" pattern has no placeholders:

```
{Hello, world}
```

and end with U+007D RIGHT CURLY BRACKET `}`.

> A _message_ consisting of a simple _pattern_:
>```
>{Hello, world!}
>```

>The same _message_ defined in a `.properties` file:
>
>```properties
>app.greetings.hello = {Hello, world!}
>```

>The same _message_ defined inline in JavaScript:
>
>```js
>let hello = new MessageFormat('{Hello, world!}')
>hello.format()
>```

### Expression

An **_expression_** is a part of a _message_ that will be determined
during the _message_'s formatting.

A **_placeholder_** is an _expression_ that appears inside of a _pattern_
and which will be replaced during the formatting of the _message_.

An _expression_ begins with U+007B LEFT CURLY BRACKET `{` 
and ends with U+007D RIGHT CURLY BRACKET `}`.

> An _expression_ can appear as a local variable value, as a _selector_, and within a _pattern_.

Author: Location is important in describing the syntax, so I think the original text is suitable for that purpose. I agree that we *also* need to describe *why* one might use an expression (not just "physical" or syntactic description, but _functional_ description too). I think those can be kept separate.

Note: a lot of your comments on this PR are about *changing* the normative aspects of the text, while this PR is fundamentally about formatting. The main semi-normative set of text changes are that I put all definitions into the form:

> A **_thing_** is {definition here}.

(with a clear definition that is *not* about the structure/serialization)

> A simple _expression_ containing a variable:
>
>```
>{Hello, {$userName}!}

> >```

Author: Yes, it should say:

```suggestion
A _message_ containing a simple _expression_ consisting of a variable name:
```

>```

>A _message_ with a `$userName` _variable_ formatted with
>the custom `:person` _function_ capable of
>declension (using either a fixed dictionary, algorithmic declension, ML, etc.):
>
>```
>{Hello, {$userName :person case=vocative}!}
>```

>A _message_ with a `$userObj` _variable_ formatted with
>the custom `:person` _function_ capable of
>plucking the first name from the object representing a person:
>
>```
>{Hello, {$userObj :person firstName=long}!}
>```

_Functions_ can be _standalone_, or can be an _opening element_ or _closing element_.

A **_standalone_** _function_ is not expected to be paired with another _function_.
An **_opening element_** is a _function_ that SHOULD be paired with a _closing function_.
A **_closing element_** is a _function_ that SHOULD be paired with an _opening function_.

An _opening element_ MAY be present in a message without a corresponding _closing element_,
and vice versa.

>A message with two markup-like _functions_, `button` and `link`,
>which the runtime can use to construct a document tree structure for a UI framework:
>
>```
>{{+button}Submit{-button} or {+link}cancel{-link}.}
>```

### Selection

> A **_selector_** selects a specific _pattern_ from a list of available _patterns_

Author: See my discussion/proposal elsewhere. This is out of scope to this PR

>which allows the message to query for presence of grammatical cases required for each variant:
>
>```
>match {$userName :hasCase}
>when vocative {Hello, {$userName :person case=vocative}!}
>when accusative {Please welcome {$userName :person case=accusative}!}
>when * {Hello!}
>```

>A message with two _selectors_:
>
>```
>match {$photoCount :number} {$userGender :equals}
>when 1 masculine {{$userName} added a new photo to his album.}
>when 1 feminine  {{$userName} added a new photo to her album.}
>when 1 *         {{$userName} added a new photo to their album.}
>when * masculine {{$userName} added {$photoCount} photos to his album.}
>when * feminine  {{$userName} added {$photoCount} photos to her album.}
>when * *         {{$userName} added {$photoCount} photos to their album.}
>```

### Local Variables

A _message_ can define local variables using a _declaration_.
A local variable might be needed for transforming input
or providing additional data to an _expression_.
Local variables appear in a _declaration_,
which defines the value of a named local variable.

>A _message_ containing a _declaration_ defining a local variable `$whom`

> >which is then used twice inside the pattern:

Author: Actually, either are correct. The body here consists of a pattern.

> _This section is non-normative._

Reviewer: If this section is now introducing normative text, this statement should be removed.

### Messages and Patterns

A **_message_** is the complete template for a specific message formatting request.

> All _messages_ MUST contain either a _pattern_ or _selectors_. 

Reviewer: This statement is a bit odd, as _selectors_ includes at least one _pattern_. How about this instead?

```suggestion
All _messages_ MUST contain one or more _patterns_.
```

A _message_ MAY contain zero or more _declarations_.

> (Implication: the empty string is not a valid message)

Reviewer: This doesn't need to be parenthetical, even though it is re-stating an implication.

```suggestion
As an implication, an empty string is not a valid message.
```

A **_pattern_** is a combination of _text_ and _placeholders_ 
to be formatted as a unit.
All _patterns_, including simple ones, begin with U+007B LEFT CURLY BRACKET `{` 
and end with U+007D RIGHT CURLY BRACKET `}`.

> > A _message_ consisting of a simple _pattern_:
> >>```
> >>{Hello, world!}
> >>```

Reviewer: There should be no need to double-indent conde samples. This applies to all other instances as well:

```suggestion
> A _message_ consisting of a simple _pattern_:
> ```
> {Hello, world!}
> ```
```

Author: Will do.

Author: Done in 5aef879

> A simple _expression_ containing a variable:
>
>>```
>>    {Hello, {$userName}!}
>>```

### Function

A **_function_** is a named modifier in an _expression_.
A _function_ MAY be followed by zero or more _options_

>For example, a _message_ with a `$date` _variable_ formatted with the `:datetime` _function_:
>
>>```
>>    {Today is {$date :datetime weekday=long}.}
>>```

>A _message_ with a `$userName` _variable_ formatted with
>the custom `:person` _function_ capable of
>declension (using either a fixed dictionary, algorithmic declension, ML, etc.):
>
>>```
>>    {Hello, {$userName :person case=vocative}!}
>>```

>A _message_ with a `$userObj` _variable_ formatted with
>the custom `:person` _function_ capable of
>plucking the first name from the object representing a person:
>
>>```
>>    {Hello, {$userObj :person firstName=long}!}
>>```

_Functions_ can be _standalone_, or can be an _opening element_ or _closing element_.

A **_standalone_** _function_ is not expected to be paired with another _function_.
An **_opening element_** is a _function_ that SHOULD be paired with a _closing function_.

> A **_closing element_** is a _function_ that SHOULD be paired with an _opening function_.

Reviewer: If we're including this in the spec, should these SHOULD statements also mention the expected order of the expressions, i.e. opening before closing?

Author: Probably, but we also allow unpaired appearance of these, so `{{-foo}something{+foo}}` might just be a fragment where the missing `{+foo}` and `{-foo}` are external to the message (externality is the argument for allowing unpaired open/close functions). 

There is nothing in the syntax that actually causes pairing to happen--and currently there is nothing in the registry that would lead to pairing either. Increasingly I think that the open/close syntax is either (a) merely a naming convention that carries no meaning or (b) woefully underspecified.

Reviewer: I'm fine to consider changes to this separately from this PR.

An _opening element_ MAY be present in a message without a corresponding _closing element_,
and vice versa.

>A message with two markup-like _functions_, `button` and `link`,
>which the runtime can use to construct a document tree structure for a UI framework:
>
>>```
>>    {{+button}Submit{-button} or {+link}cancel{-link}.}

> >>```

Reviewer: With the triple backticking, the four-space indentations should also be removed. This also applies to other places where this change is applied.

>>```

>A message with a single _selector_ and a custom `:hasCase` function
>which allows the message to query for presence of grammatical cases required for each variant:
>
>>```
>>    match {$userName :hasCase}
>>    when vocative {Hello, {$userName :person case=vocative}!}
>>    when accusative {Please welcome {$userName :person case=accusative}!}
>>    when * {Hello!}
>>```

>A message with two _selectors_:
>
>>```
>>    match {$photoCount :number} {$userGender :equals}
>>    when 1 masculine {{$userName} added a new photo to his album.}
>>    when 1 feminine {{$userName} added a new photo to her album.}
>>    when 1 * {{$userName} added a new photo to their album.}
>>    when * masculine {{$userName} added {$photoCount} photos to his album.}
>>    when * feminine {{$userName} added {$photoCount} photos to her album.}
>>    when * * {{$userName} added {$photoCount} photos to their album.}
>>```

### Local Variables

A _message_ can define local variables using a _declaration_.
A local variable might be needed for transforming input
or providing additional data to an _expression_.
Local variables appear in a _declaration_,
which defines the value of a named local variable.

> >A _message_ containing a _declaration_ defining a local variable `$whom` which is then used twice inside the pattern:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>A _message_ containing a _declaration_ defining a local variable `$whom`
>which is then used twice inside the pattern:
```

_This section is non-normative._

### Message

A **_message_** is the complete template for a specific message formatting request.

> All _messages_, including simple ones, begin with U+007B LEFT CURLY BRACKET `{` 

Reviewer 2: Is this accurate though?

A message can contain declarations, that start with `let $foo = {...}`,
or can contain a with a selector, starting with `match`.
In these cases the message does not start with `{`

The text below in the document seems to also consider these elements (declarations & selector) as part of the message:

> A _message_ containing a _declaration_ defining a local variable `$whom` which is then used twice inside the pattern:
>
> `let $whom = {$monster :noun case=accusative}`
> ...

and

> A message can have multiple selectors.
> A message with a single _selector_:
> 
> `match {$count :number}`

Author: You are correct: we start in code mode. Note that this is not text that I originated in this PR, so we've had a spec bug for a while.

Author: See if 7bd78fa fixes it.

An _expression_ begins with U+007B LEFT CURLY BRACKET `{` 
and ends with U+007D RIGHT CURLY BRACKET `}`.

An _expression_ can appear as a local variable value, as a _selector_, and within a _pattern_.

> A simple _expression_ is a bare variable name:
>
>>```
>>    {Hello, {$userName}!}
>>```

### Function

A **_function_** is a named modifier in an _expression_.
A _function_ MAY be followed by zero or more _options_

>For example, a _message_ with a `$date` _variable_ formatted with the `:datetime` _function_:
>
>>```
>>    {Today is {$date :datetime weekday=long}.}
>>```

>A _message_ with a `$userName` _variable_ formatted with
>the custom `:person` _function_ capable of
>declension (using either a fixed dictionary, algorithmic declension, ML, etc.):
>
>>```
>>    {Hello, {$userName :person case=vocative}!}
>>```

>A _message_ with a `$userObj` _variable_ formatted with
>the custom `:person` _function_ capable of
>plucking the first name from the object representing a person:
>
>>```
>>    {Hello, {$userObj :person firstName=long}!}
>>```

_Functions_ can be _standalone_, or can be an _opening element_ or _closing element_.

> A **_standalone_** _function_ is not expected to be paired with another _function_.

Reviewer 2: The `standalone`, `open`, `close` are properties of the expression, not the function.

Author: Is it _expression_ or _placeholder_? That is, does it have meaning to say that this is an "open expression":

```
let $foo = {$bar +open}
```

Author: ... also we should say that `standalone` is the default for expressions such as `{$foo}` that have only an operand.

Reviewer: > Is it _expression_ or _placeholder_? That is, does it have meaning to say that this is an "open expression":
> 
> ```
> let $foo = {$bar +open}
> ```

We have not explicitly discussed this (yet!), but yes, that's what we have right now.

> ... also we should say that `standalone` is the default for expressions such as `{$foo}` that have only an operand.

I'm pretty sure that such a default is not currently defined, and that this is probably best considered within the context of discussing our function registry and our implementations' behaviour assigning function handlers to expressions that do not include an annotattion.

This PR should not make any such statements.

### Selectors

**_Selectors_** are a _match statement_ followed by one or more _variants_.

> _Selectors_ provide the ability for a _message_ to use a _pattern_
> that varies in content or form depending on values determined at runtime.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A _message_ can vary its content or form
depending on values determined at runtime.
_Selectors_ make this variation possible.
```

It's not really the _pattern_ that varies (the static, syntactic construct), but the formatted output (the runtime result). Each syntactic pattern is fixed; the choice of pattern varies.

A **_selector expression_** is an _expression_ that will be used as part 
of the selection process.

> A **_match statement_** indicates that the _message_ contains more than one

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A **_match statement_** indicates that the _message_ contains at least one
```

**error?**

A `match` with exactly one variant is well-formed.

### Expressions

> An **_expression_** is a _selector_ or a placeholder in a _pattern_

Author: Yes.

that is evaluated during the formatting process. Each _expression_ MUST 
start with an _operand_ or an _annotation_.
An _expression_ MUST NOT be empty.

An **_operand_** is either a _literal_ or a _variable_ that is the "subject"
of an _expression_, that is, it is the value upon which the _expression_ will

> be evaluated.

Author: I tend to agree, but was needing to write a definition from whole cloth.

Watch for a new revision.

### Variants

A **_variant_** is a _pattern_ associated with a set of _keys_.
Each _variant_ MUST begin with the _keyword_ `when`,

> be followed by a sequence of _keys_,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
be followed by a non-empty sequence of _keys_,
```

pattern = "{" *(text / expression) "}"
```

> **Example**
> 
> A simple _pattern_ containing _text_:
> ```
> {Hello, world!}
> ```
>
> An empty _pattern_:
> ```
> {}
> ```
>

> > Some _patterns_ with _expressions_:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> Some _patterns_ that contain _text_ and/or _expressions_:
```

> ```
> {{$foo}}
> {Hello {$user}!}
> {You sent {$count :number maxFractionDigits=0} notifications to {$numFriends :number type=spellout} friends.}
> ```
>
> A _pattern_ containing three spaces:
> ```
> {   }
> ```

### Expressions

> An _expression_ can appear as a local variable value, as a _selector_, and within a _pattern_.

Reviewer 3: **error?**

I think this is repeated from line 136.

Author: See the forthcoming refactor :-(... this is one reason that exists.

> Each _expression_ MUST start with an _operand_ or an _annotation_.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The contents of each _expression_ MUST start with an _operand_ or an _annotation_.
```

(I think there's something missing about curly brackets having to enclose an expression?)

An _expression_ MUST NOT be empty.

> An **_operand_** is a _literal_ or a _variable_ to be evaluated in an _expression_.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
An **_operand_** MUST appear in an _expression_. An _operand_ is either a _literal_ or a _variable_.
```

Author: Your proposed change loses the "definition form" that this PR is adding, that is, that a definition say *what* something is before imposing anything on it.

> An **_operand_** is _whatever it is_.

It can then go on to say that it MUST (only) appear in an expression (note that your phrase is misleading, since an expression  is not required to have an operand)

An _operand_ MAY be optionally followed by an _annotation_.

An **_annotation_** consists of a _function_ and its named _options_,
or consists of a _reserved_ sequence.

A **_function_** is functionality used to evaluate, format, select, or otherwise 
process an _operand_, or, if lacking an _operand_, its _annotation_. 

> _Functions_ do not accept any positional arguments
> other than the _operand_ in front of them.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A _function_ has at most one positional argument
(its _operand_, if present).
```

### Expressions

An **_expression_** is a _selector_ or a _placeholder_ in a _pattern_
that is evaluated during the formatting process.
Each _expression_ MUST start with an _operand_ or an _annotation_.
An _expression_ MUST NOT be empty.

> An **_operand_** is a _literal_ or a _variable_ to be evaluated in a _placeholder_.

Reviewer: Declarations and selectors also have operands.

```suggestion
An **_operand_** is a _literal_ or a _variable_ to be evaluated in an _expression_.
```

### Expressions

An **_expression_** is a _selector_ or a _placeholder_ in a _pattern_

> that is evaluated during the formatting process.

Reviewer: Sorry, should've noticed this earlier: This leaves out declarations as a possible place for expressions.

#### Reserved

A **_reserved_** _annotation_ is an _annotation_ whose syntax is reserved

> for future standardization.

Author: I will remove the private use section and create a separate PR (including an ABNF change) to host it.

### Keywords

> A **_keyword_** is a reserved token that is part of the _message_ syntax.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A **_keyword_** is a reserved token that has a unique meaning in the _message_ syntax.
```

(Technically many possible tokens are part of the _message_ syntax, not just keywords)

### Literals

A **_literal_** is a character sequence that appears outside

> of _text_ in various parts of a _message_.

Reviewer 3: This phrasing seems backwards, since _text_ can only appear at the top level of a pattern and _literal_s can appear in many places, but I'm not sure how to rephrase it.

A _literal_ can appear in a _declaration_, as a _key_ value,
as an _operand_, or in the value of an _option_.
A _literal_ MAY include any Unicode code point
except for surrogate code points U+D800 through U+DFFF.

All code points are preserved.

A **_quoted_** literal begins and ends with U+005E VERTICAL BAR `|`.
The characters `\` and `|` within a _quoted_ literal MUST be 
escaped as `\\` and `\|`.

An **_unquoted_** literal is a _literal_ that does not require the `|`

> quotes around it to be distinct from the rest of the _message_ syntax.

Reviewer 3: I think this language makes sense to someone writing a parser, but not to a user necessarily. Perhaps something like "a _literal_ that does not include any of the following characters..." and then refer to where the list of forbidden characters is defined?

Author: I tend to agree, but... an unquoted literal is not just a literal that doesn't include specific characters. What marks it as unquoted is that it is missing its quotes! That is, `|42|` is a _quoted_ literal that doesn't need to be quoted.

### Escape Sequences

An **_escape sequence_** is a two-character sequence starting with

> `\` U+005C REVERSE SOLIDUS. 

Author: This is the W3C I18N chair in me struggling to get out... (we're working on [this masterpiece of formatting joy](https://w3c.github.io/bp-i18n-specdev/#char_ref_template))
